
# The government of Internet Governance: Considerations on multistakeholderism as technoepistemic colonialism

## by Carolina Batista Israel {style="display:none"}

###### Carolina Batista Israel ^★^

\ 

<code>internet&nbsp;governance **\|** multistakeholderism **\|** technoepistemic colonialism</code>

> They’re going to get rubbed out sooner or later, and it might as well be sooner. It’s just how things happen to be. Primitive races always have to give way to civilized ones. — The Word for World is Forest (Le Guin, 1972)  

<p class="section">Contextualization</p>

This position paper presents itself as a reflective text that seeks to question whether Internet Governance, as a technology of government, has become an instrument of neutralizing social struggles through the multistakeholder model, translating into an instrument of technoepistemic colonization. This reflection follows a genealogical approach to understand the emergence of governance as a concept and as a neoliberal policy, its adoption in the realm of Internet Governance, and its reverberations in power relations, suppressing, based on the premise of consensus among stakeholders, the possibilities for insurgency and the construction of alternative technical futures. It results from an effort of critical tension and existential anguish that seeks to question how we, academics and activists, may be contributing to an eternal containment that perpetuates digital colonialism.

<div class="affiliation" style="margin-top: 100mm">^★^ Research professor at the Federal University of Paraná. Member of the Rede de Pesquisa em Governança da Internet.<br>[<carol_israel@ufpr.br>](mailto:carol_israel@ufpr.br)</div>

<p class="section">Premises of governance as neoliberal policy</p>

The genealogy of the Internet is inscribed in the consolidation of the global network in a format that allowed this technical device to become one of the main instruments of economic globalization and late 20th-century neoliberalism, based on three main milestones: the replacement of the technical standardization model by multilateral organizations with standardization through private representation; the deconstruction of a sovereign telecommunications model through the global commercialization of infrastructures; and multistakeholderism in the management of the Internet's critical resources as a strategy for neutralizing state multilateralism.  

The development of the corporate Internet, as we know it today, passed, on one hand, through the definition of its technical standardization by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), establishing private representation and the consensus policy as premises for supposed equality and neutrality in the production of standards. On the other hand, it passed through the definition of legal norms that deregulated the telecommunications sector, leading to the formation of large multinational conglomerates and the concentrated privatization of connection infrastructures. And, no less importantly, the privatization of the Internet’s critical resources by the United States, with the creation of ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers), replaced political multilateralism with multistakeholderism, breaking with the global geopolitical recognition of other sovereignties as equal in matters of international interest, and establishing the principle of governance. With the discourse of the state’s diminishing role, the principle of Internet management was assimilated by the multistakeholder model, which, under the justification of distributing power among stakeholders, operated as a mechanism of interstate power asymmetry and the neutralization of conflicts between social segments with distinct interests.

The paradox of governance and neoliberalism, however, lies in their inseparability from governmental policies. Their feasibility in certain strategic sectors depends on governmental regulation. In this sense, governance, as a retreat from the economic political participation of the state, is nothing more than a state policy.  
Thomas Lemke observes that governance operates through the participation and representation of the governed, placing emphasis on dialogue and consensus. In this way, it expands the public sphere "to the extent that it promotes consultation and inclusion of a range of social and economic actors whom it addresses as 'partners' or as 'stakeholders'" (Lemke 2017, 51). In this politics of inclusion and consensus, it is assumed that the representativeness of the parties makes decision-making a rational and neutral practice, in which "conflicts are not considered a threat to the social order, but rather a means of social progress" (Lemke 2017, 54).  

Noting the growing political and economic use of governance in the mid-1990s, Bob Jessop attributed the emergence of this political perspective to the collapse of the welfare state in the post-war era  (Jessop 1995). The author points out that, although the term had been used since the 14th century in a broad sense, related to ways of governing, by the late 1970s it would be revived with a new meaning in opposition to the idea of government. The transformation from the political and administrative centrality of government to decentralized mechanisms, where stakeholders assume part of the responsibility, participates in the disengagement of the welfare state, engaging non-governmental organizations and public-private partnerships in the management of economic and social relations (Jessop 1995).  

The flexibilization of the boundaries separating the state from civil society did not annul its role as a regulatory agent. The state continues to regulate the rules of governance, defining the scope of possible actions for the various "stakeholders”, as occurred in the management of the Internet’s critical resources. Here, action is equally "subject to norms, written or not, formal or informal" (Santos 2009 \[1996\], 78). In this sense, governance, as a discourse of state retrenchment, is nothing more than a state policy, or a government of governance, referred to as meta-governance by Jessop (Jessop 2016a, 2016b).  

Jeanette Hofmann refers to the multistakeholder model of Internet Governance as a fiction, an "imaginary that provides meaning and regularity to a fragmented and disordered world" (Hofmann 2016, 30). As an imaginary, multistakeholderism generates a performance behavior, from which those who engage work to make their proclaimed qualities a reality: inclusion, diversity, and bottom-up policy formulation. For the author, ICANN's and the Internet Governance Forum's (IGF) multistakeholderism is based on three promises that were never fulfilled: the promise of global representation, the promise of democratizing the transnational sphere, and the promise of superior policy outcomes (Hofmann 2016).  

At the beginning of the 21st century, amid pressure from several dissatisfied nation-states with the governance model of critical Internet resources, the International Telecommunication Union – a body linked to the UN – held two World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) meetings in 2003 and 2005, resulting in the creation of the IGF, with annual periodicity.  

Having participated in the process between the two WSIS meetings, McLaughlin and Pickard (2005) observed at that moment a movement by the United Nations to shape an Internet Governance model they called neocorporatist. The corporatism of the welfare state consisted of celebrating cooperation between the working class, the state, and the private sector as a mechanism for social balance, eliminating oppositions. According to the authors, WSIS had become a similar mechanism, but on a global scale, with the absorption of Civil Society into the operating mechanisms of the UN.  
Based on a multistakeholder participatory model, represented by the governmental, private, technical-scientific, and civil sectors, Internet Governance Forums became a moment of debate with only a propositional bias, without any deliberative power over the management model of resources impacting the various dimensions of a daily life characterized by the ubiquity of the Internet.  

One of the most significant contradictions of governance lies in the fact that "stakeholders" are represented within the same framework as equals, when in reality the various sectors do not have the same political and economic power. The government of governance, likewise privileging certain states over others, produces an imbalance in interstate relations and renewed forms of digital colonialism.  

<p class="section">Internet Governance as Technoepistemic Colonialism</p>

The Internet is not restricted to the technical domain. Technologies carry with them ways of being and knowing that are co-constitutive of cognitive and sensory structures, shaping socio-technical relationships within a complex technoepistemic system. In its process of concretization, the technical object gives rise to forms of composition of geographic space, derived from the mutual transformations engendered by the relationship between technique, environment and society (Simondon 2012 \[1958\]; Santos 1996; Stiegler 2018; Hui 2020). These are processes of sympoietic worlding, in which the entanglements between humans, non-humans, and other-than-humans compose new semiotic-material totalities and realities. Contrary to the perspective of self-regulating (autopoietic) systems, sympoiesis understands existence as a synthesis of co-determination produced by the relationship between organic and inorganic beings, including technical beings (Haraway 2016). In this context, the control over the fabric of socio-technical entanglements translates into power relations over worlding processes, even though the becoming-with movements possess a high degree of uncertainty.  

The information society, grounded in the Internet, has converted capital into a sociotechnical entanglement continuously experienced on a global scale, as a space of virtual simultaneity. In this semiotic-material worlding process, both technical presence and absence produce effects of technoepistemic domination. Territories with higher technical density experience a form of existence, both bodily and mentally, that has become inseparable from digital technologies, with every activity, thought, and feeling absorbed into devices (Lovink 2023). Meanwhile, territories still situated on the frontier of the digital divide or in a condition of marginalized access participate in the uneven and combined development that allows capital to reproduce itself through the exploitation of undervalued labor due to the lack of connectivity as a fundamental absence.  

In a globalized world where access to the Internet affects the conditions of existence, connectivity becomes a fundamental human right, as advocated by several countries, including Brazil. The current pursuit of Internet universalization thus becomes the desire for the total realization of the digital condition as a technical fatalism, a civilizational progress to be shared by all of humanity.  

In current sociotechnical configurations, however, the expansion of connectivity has been serving digital colonialism through a new division of the globe for data extraction practices by large companies, reproducing old dependencies through power arrangements updated by technologies (Faustino and Lippold, 2023). Digital colonialism is based on technoepistemic domination, which involves the primacy of monetary value embedded in technical infrastructures as an inescapable condition. But it also includes hegemonic political morphologies, such as multistakeholderism, that neutralize the possibility of insurgency, as a consequence of the philosophy of consensus among stakeholders. It mobilizes academics, scientists, social movements, and civil organizations for an eternal regulatory struggle, translating into a continuous effort of containment against colonization. It privileges experts and excludes other epistemologies, other than Western ones, as technical, political, and economic possibilities.  

The multistakeholder model assumes that it is possible to reconcile the interests and worldviews of stakeholders, such as the private sector and civil society/social movements. By forging coexistence between these segments, it neutralizes conflicts and antagonisms, admits the impossibility of futures with alternative arrangements, and reifies the status quo.  

In digital neoliberalism, popular forces become stakeholders who recognize the dominant classes as their interlocutors for building a common future, eliminating the possibility of revolution and other sociotechnical futures.  

Multistakeholderism is a system that legitimizes commercial exploitation and monetary value as the principle of development and constitution of digital architectures. In the multistakeholder model, there is no space for a non-capitalist world. It presents itself, therefore, as a sociotechnical dimension of what Mark Fisher (2009) describes as capitalist realism, a socio-spiritual condition that assumes the impossibility of alternatives to this system. When all dimensions of life, material and immaterial, are absorbed by capitalism, including, with multistakeholderism, social struggles and antagonisms.  

<p class="section">Citation diversity statement</p>

Through this declaration, we join a collective effort to undo the structural epistemological erasure in academia against women, genderqueer people, Black people, people from the global South, and other social groups, whose voices are less heard due to bias in citations. We believe that transparency in relation to our bibliographies is essential to understand the present, and to change this structural condition in a joint and consistent way. In this paper, citations are distributed as follows: female names (4; 26,67%), male names (14; 86,67%), female-male names (1; 6,67%), and institutional sources (0; 0%).  

The gender distribution in this article reflects how the automated search process for references can lead to a predominance of male reflections, since our thinking is inseparable from our socio-corporeal conditions (such as race, gender, class, among others). This exercise will serve as a starting point for me to actively seek my references with more attention to gender and racial equity, even though the present article includes two Black authors and one Asian author.  

### References

Faustino, Deivison, and Walter Lippold. 2023. *Colonialismo Digital: por uma Crítica Hacker-fanoniana.* São Paulo: Boitempo Editorial.  
Fisher, Mark, Caue Seignemartin Ameni, Hugo Albuquerque, Manuela Beloni, Jorge Adeodato e Maikel da Silveira Rodrigo Gonsalves, Victor Marques, e Sobinfluencia. 2020. *Realismo Capitalista: é Mais Fácil Imaginar o fim do Mundo do que o fim do Capitalismo?* São Paulo: Autonomia Literária.  
Haraway, Donna J. 2016. *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene.* Illustrated edição. Durham London: Duke University Press.  
Hofmann, Jeanette. 2016. “Multi-Stakeholderism in Internet Governance: Putting a Fiction into Practice”. *Journal of Cyber Policy* 1 (1): 29–49. <https://doi.org/10.1080/23738871.2016.1158303>.  
Hui, Yuk. 2020. *Tecnodiversidade.* São Paulo: Ubu Editora.  
Jessop, Bob. 1995. “The Regulation Approach, Governance, and Post-Fordism: Alternative Perspectives on Economic and Political Change’?” *Economy and Society* 24 (agosto):307–33. <https://doi.org/10.1080/03085149500000013>.  
______. 2016a. *The State: Past, Present, Future.* Cambridge: Polity Press. <http://catalogimages.wiley.com/images/db/jimages/9780745633046.jpg>.  
______. 2016b. “Territory, Politics, Governance and Multispatial Metagovernance”. "Territory, Politics, Governance" 4 (1): 8–32. <https://doi.org/10.1080/21622671.2015.1123173>.  
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1972. *The Word for World Is Forest.* New York: Berkley Pub.  
Lemke, Thomas. 2017. *Foucault, Governamentalidade e Crítica.* São Paulo: Editora Politeia.  
Lovink, Geert. 2023. *Extinção da Internet.* São Paulo: Editora Funilaria.  
McLaughlin, Lisa, e Victor Pickard. 2005. “What Is Bottom-up about Global Internet Governance?” *Global Media and Communication* 1 (3): 357–73. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1742766505058129>.  
Santos, Milton. 2009. *A natureza do espaço: técnica e tempo, razão e emoção.* São Paulo: Edusp.  
Simondon, Gilbert. 2012 [1958]. *Du mode d’existence des objets techniques.* Paris: Editions Aubier.  
Stiegler, Bernard. 2018. *La technique et le temps: 1. La Faute d Épiméthée. 2. La Désorientation 3. Le Temps du cinéma et la question du mal-être.* Paris: Fayard.

