# Notes on the ethno-stack

## by Héctor Beltrán {style="display:none"}

###### Héctor Beltrán ^★^

\ 

<code>code&nbsp;**\|**&nbsp;ethnography&nbsp;**\|**&nbsp;infrastructures&nbsp;**\|**&nbsp;users</code><br><br>

<p style="text-indent: 0; text-size: 200%">The “ethno-stack” responds to this symposium’s goal to “situate IG studies in view of quick technological transformations within and on top of its infrastructure.” What exactly are the different layers that make up this infrastructure, this stack? What type of work does it take to move between the layers of this stack? How does difference in social position (along dimensions of race, gender, class, disability, sexuality) influence the way users navigate the stack? And how do other(ed) communities propose we re-configure the stack?</p>

<div class="affiliation" style="margin-top: 170mm">^★^ Associate Professor, MIT<br>[<hectorb@mit.edu>](mailto:hectorb@mit.edu)</div>

<p class="section">Grounding the Stack</p>

The stack, in computing terms, refers to the interrelated and interdependent layers of hardware components and software protocols that make high-level computation and programs possible. To move from the bottom of the stack (e.g. machine code) to the top of the stack (e.g. programming languages and systems) means to traverse the corresponding circuits, microchips, and computer code that can be part of each layer of abstraction that makes up the system. The fundamental idea is that one can navigate the stack by building up layers of abstraction from lower-level components. Across different layers of the stack, each configuration of elements becomes a component to be used by other components. The corresponding internal implementation of each element is abstracted away and largely irrelevant to the other components that use it.  

Social scientists who research new computing technologies and their aspirational promises have proposed that in order for marginalized populations to infuse their own worldviews and future aspirations into a system, they must fully participate in and be adept at navigating all layers of the stack. The structure of the stack inherently hides conditions, keeping its range of possibilities from view. In the world of professional software development, a full-stack developer is a programmer who shows interest and mastery in all facets and layers of software development. A common way to describe a full-stack developer, for example, is as someone who can write code for both the back-end of a project (e.g. databases, architecture, hardware) and the front-end of a project (e.g. graphical user interfaces, web applications). Jason Edward Lewis (2016) argues that only by fully and comprehensively infiltrating and navigating all layers of the stack can Indigenous people, or other communities systematically excluded from the power of computing, increase their ability to “make the technology speak in the way that they [we] desire” (242). Becoming a full-stack code worker might thus help to expose the stack and uncover its liberatory possibilities.  

Learning to navigate the stack across all its layers is one way to think with and beyond computing-as-usual, to think of alternative stacks or of alternatives to the stack. Even scholars who push the stack and its metaphors to the planetary scale to think about everything, from human and nonhuman users to state governance to climates, leave conceptual space for other stacks to emerge. “We need not one but many Stack design theories,” Benjamin Bratton (2016, 300) tells us. His invitation starts with what he calls The Black Stack, the “generic term for The-Stack-to-Come that we cannot observe, map, name, or recognize” (368). The idea is that this more elusive and future-looking stack is coming and we can have a hand in modelling it. If we cannot escape the stack, at least it’s designed to be re-designed and re-made.”  

<p class="section">Ethnographic Entries into the Stack</p>

My proposal for thinking with but also against the stack starts with the concept of the ethno-stack. The ethno in ethno-stack points first to the definition of “ethno-” as a particular culture or people, this notion of difference signaling the different stacks that can emerge from stack theorizing.  In order to build the Black Stack or the Stack-to-come, coders might have to “…first imagine it in ruins and work backward from this as both a conclusion and a starting point” (Bratton 2016: 357). A particular collective might have to destroy the stack in order to re-build it, to make it work for them. The ethno in the ethno-stack also refers to the ethnographic approach that can lead us to think in this more expansive way about computing and its code worlds. Like the systems engineer, the avid ethnographer also deploys a type of “systems thinking” as they set out to their fieldsites or when they return from their sites to do the theorizing.  They observe or reflect about (or from within) a particular system to find its internal logic. Whether it’s an economic system, a legal system, an educational system, or a particular community, ethnographers are determined to find out how these systems “work.” Depending on their disciplinary training and what their specific purposes are, they develop theories about how these different (perhaps autonomous systems) interact to make up “society.”  

The ethno- and ethnographic in the ethno-stack thus work together to ground the stack, to ask how it might be inhabited, contested, accommodated, resisted, multiplied, situated, or bent. The ethno-stack is grounded in this “systems thinking and doing” approach to research and theorizing, a line of inquiry dating back to the era when anthropologists called for other scholars to become familiar with vocabulary of information theory and take seriously the possibilities and effects of systems thinking and doing (Bateson 1972; Mead 1968). Following and unpacking the code work up and down the layers of the stacks ethnographically can help us understand how computing elements become entangled with human collectives in the code worlds at the same time that coders use the logics underlying these particular arrangements to think about the layers of the different systems they navigate. The code work becomes “good to think with” – for research participants and for ethnographers – about how one moves from MOSFETs to logic gates, but also about how socio-technical systems construct and are constructed along markers of racial, gendered, and embodied difference (Beltrán 2023). Ethnography opens up the possibility to explore how code workers themselves connect their coding practices with their constructions of self and negotiations of diverse socio-political realities.  

<p class="section">Notes for \[Re-Ordering, Bending, Destroying\] The Stack</p>

In our contemporary world, surrounded by code worlds, the stack seduces. The stack envelops. The stack is everywhere, and perhaps, the stack is everything. And if you are a modern subject or a researcher who thought you could exist outside of the stack, perhaps escape the stack, “It is likely that every contemporary academic discipline relies on some form of the stack model as part of its ontology, epistemology, or methodology” (Bratton 2016, 375).  

So if we accept our fate and assume for the moment that there is no escape from the stack, or even the stack to come, how do we prepare for the stacked future? Even the stack theorists agree that perhaps we should re-imagine it, re-build it, start from zero. By situating this re-imagining and re-constructing from an Indigenous perspective, Lewis proposes that we need to actively re-build the stack. But he warns that once we infiltrate the deepest layers of this corrupted, monocultural stack, we’ll find the “ghosts” that first built it, along with their corresponding epistemologies and ideologies (2016, 246-247). Lewis’ vision of what these technical ghosts represents builds on D. Fox Harrell’s (2013) idea of phantasms, or a combination of images and ideas that becomes codified and reified in computing systems and encompass a “sense of self, metaphor, social categorization, narrative, and poetic thinking” (ix). In order for Indigenous people to “make the technology speak in the way that [they] desire” (243), they need to infiltrate the deepest layers of the stack to displace the ghosts or phantasms that have instantiated themselves at its core level; they need to infuse these root stack layers with Indigenous stories, worldviews, and epistemologies.  

Our challenge, then, is to think about how to ground the stack, how to “bend” its deep technical structure, as Lewis writes, to make it work for our respective communities. This is particularly challenging for marginalized groups who have been systematically excluded from the stack and from stack theorizing. Bratton views the “user” subject in the Stack as “a position that can be occupied by anything (or pluralities, multitudes and composites)” (Bratton 376), and this user might be something beyond the human, “Users (e.g. human, animal, machine) view The Stack and that initiate chains of interaction (columns) up and down its layers” (375). This might work for unmarked subjects accustomed to seeing themselves as generic users within a system, but for subjects marked along some dimensions of difference, their preoccupation might be to simply make it to the “human” category or to not be noticed as an exceptional user. The average “user” (white, male, heteronormative) is historically applauded for bending, hacking, or otherwise skillful technical maneuvering; for the racialized, gendered, or sexualized user, these moves are frequently criminalized and always surveilled (Beltrán 2022). To understand the role of computing in Othering and vice versa, we must think of computing, and its attendant infrastructures (“the internet”) not only as a field of expertise and as a set of converging technologies, but also as a means of organizing and differentially valuing knowledge as well as a method for surveilling and categorizing groups of people and their knowledge practices (Amrute and Murillo 2020).  

<p class="section">Citation diversity statement</p>

Through this declaration, we join a collective effort to undo the structural epistemological erasure in academia against women, genderqueer people, Black people, people from the global South, and other social groups, whose voices are less heard due to bias in citations. We believe that transparency in relation to our bibliographies is essential to understand the present, and to change this structural condition in a joint and consistent way. In this paper, citations are distributed as follows: identify as Black, Indigenous, Latinx or Latin American (6; 75%), female names (1; 12.5%), male names (6; 75%), female-male names (1; 12.5%), and institutional sources (0; 0%).

<p class="section">References</p>

Amrute, S. & Murillo, L.F. (2020). Introduction: Computing in/from the South. *Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, and Technoscience* 6 (2). https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v6i2.34594  
Bateson, G. (1972). *Steps to an Ecology of Mind*. University of Chicago Press.  
Beltrán, H. (2023). *Code Work: Hacking Across the U.S./México Techno-Borderlands*. Princeton University Press.  
Beltrán, H. (2022). Hacking, Computing Expertise, and Difference. *Just Tech*. Social Science Research Council.  
Bratton, B. H. (2016). *The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty*. MIT Press.  
Harrell, D. F. (2013). *Phantasmal Media: An Approach to Imagination, Computation, and Expression*. MIT Press.
Lewis, J. E. (2016). Preparations for a Haunting: Notes toward and Indigenous Future Imaginary. In Barney, Darin, Gabriella Coleman, Christine Ross, Jonathan Sterne, and Tamar Tembeck (Eds.), *The Participatory Condition in the Digital Age* (pp. 229-249). University of Minnesota Press.  
Mead, M. (1968). Cybernetics of Cybernetics. In Heinz von Foerster, John D. White, Larry J, Peterson, and John K. Russell (Eds.), *Purposive Systems: Proceedings of the Fifith Annual Symposium of the American Society of Cybernetics* (pp. 1-11). Spartan Books.


