
# Digging up a buried body: Uncovering theories of change for people-centered Internet infrastructure 

## by Britt Paris {style="display:none"}

###### Britt Paris[^1]  

**Keywords**  
Internet infrastructure, theory of change, cooperativity, social movement theory  

### Introduction

Information infrastructures, like the Internet, are highly organized yet chaotic and disordered systems laden with power. The Internet is more than technical material wires, cables, fiber, routers, and protocols that facilitate connection, it is bound with multiple economic, environmental, social, political, activities and imperatives. It is necessary to dig up and uncover the power relations made invisible in these sociotechnical systems if we want something else.  
The standard assumption in internet governance is that problems wrought by the tech industry can be fixed by expert actors who ‘stand in’ for, or represent, some segment of the public. On the other hand, people-centered social movement scholars Jane McAlevey (2016) and Frances Fox Piven (Piven & Cloward, 1978) emphasize that nearly all effective social movements in history are lead by ordinary people building broad-based power. In keeping with social movement and labor theorization and practice, in this work I outline people-centered Internet infrastructure as an organizing challenge, as I discuss theories of change to clarify the terrain of possibility for Internet governance to be more concretely tied with other social and political struggles under capitalism.  
Here I advocate for cooperatizing the entirety of Internet infrastructure. While the author follows Rosa Luxumberg’s critiques of Bernstein (Luxemburg, 2006), and recognizes cooperatives are not radical in the anticapitalist sense. In the contemporary world prefigured by corporate technofeudalism, where the revolution never came, cooperatives are a decent – but not perfect - goal to strive towards (Sandoval, 2016). Indeed following Luxumberg’s understanding of communicative infrastructure as a necessary tool for capitalist power in the Accumulation of Capital (Luxemburg, 2015) while thinking about her later call for both reform and revolution, and  updating it for the present, the Internet can be understood as a site of meaningful struggle in which people try to take back the tools of the master to serve themselves. This work imagines Internet infrastructure as a site of struggle for common people to “[bring] fragments together, making them legible as many fronts of one struggle against capitalism” (Dean, 2012). By this I mean that Internet infrastructure is a set of objects and phenomena connected with other material struggles over which people can build strategic alliances  - between activist groups, public institutions, surviving co-ops, existing radical networks, and labor unions - to formulate demands in solidarity with one another, and mobilize power for meaningful bottom-up change. While a discussion of relationships to modes of production is important for this work, it is the subject of a larger project from which this is drawn (Paris 2025), and is far too lengthy for a short position paper.  

### Practices and theories of change
This short meditation draws from previous research, and a future book project, that focuses on different parts of Internet infrastructure, from cables to Internet exchange points (IXP), to protocols, service providers, and applications, highlighting the paid and unpaid work and natural resources that go into the maintenance of Internet infrastructure. Understanding how the groups involved with governance, maintenance, and use of these Infrastructures helps us hypothesize about how to organize resources to affect those who hold the power to solve the various problems of Internet infrastructure.  
Within the infrastructural stack, protocols have been built to favor market driven capitalism and the imperial property state. Previous work on Future Internet Architecture (FIA) - that were conceptualized in the 2010s to circumvent congestion at the layers of addressing and routing data – ideals of frictionless use were built on 1960s imaginaries of American hegemony and negation of the material realm of bodies, labor, and their class, race, and gender identities, as well as the elimination of the political struggle tied with these. FIAs intervention of in-network data storage does hold promise to change Internet infrastructure at the protological layer and subvert IXP rentiers deep within the connection layers of Internet infrastructure, their data routing and recall mechanisms allow for further commodification and surveillance, and they invite military and corporate partnerships. This FIA endeavor echoes ideals of reform from technocrats that can only enable incremental technical change, if any at all, following Piven and Cloward (1978) and McAleavey (2016) because institutions are vested in maintaining the status quo of power relations.  
Theory of change FIAs: If we build a protocol that solves a congestion problem, this will make our work valuable to the government defense programs and industry, which is the way technology has always scaled up.  
On the other end of the spectrum, Internet service cooperatives like the People’s Rural Telecommunications Cooperative (PRTC) hold a material and political commitment to meaningful people-focused reform and maintenance of Internet infrastructure. These public service commitments are mandated through New Deal Programs that still support the PRTC. These material and political commitments are advanced by their appearance of staying out of party politics in very conservative leaning areas. But, instead reinforcing an outdated version of a body-less infrastructure, as the FIAs engage, they are defined by their radical governance solutions, albeit at a small scale, where their members they serve can have input in the direction of the infrastructural endeavor. Users are not customers to extract value from but rather considered member-partners in the cooperative. However, within this more radical frame, these sites must also negotiate with private industry as it is at once crucial for their survival within the capitalist system, and as their material commitments mandated by the New Deal necessarily include local economic uplift—which is always a market-driven affair. PRTC negotiates with the private equity firms that extract rent for connecting through Internet Exchange Points. Further, these negotiations are constantly negotiating with privatization and private entities or “partners” gutting their public service mandate.  
Theory of change PRTC: If our rural cooperative offers Internet service to members, then the state will continue to give us money to move forward with our work which will significantly improve the quality of life for our members.  
The People’s Tech Project (PTP) theory of change is the clearest, as it is explicitly an advocacy organization that is explicitly premised on a theory of change. It is different from the PRTC as it is an activist effort attempting to organize locales where there is no state support for cooperative Internet alternatives, first to connect technical problems with other social problems including racial, economic, health, and environmental justice to create affinities and working relationships across groups of people with these concerns to imagine sociotechnical infrastructures that might work better for the multifaceted and connected problems they face. Through these working relationships, they build power, making it possible to move towards the next steps where they can push for more state support, or to reconfigure any number of practices and resources as they intervene in Internet infrastructure.  
Theory of Change PTP:  
- If local communities develop intersectional visions for justice, can move forward with those goals as they relate to tech justice. 
- As municipalities move forward with these interrelated social and tech justice at the local level, then these municipal or local groups will build power through collaboration with other localities doing the same thing. 
- As the localities build power around tech and social justice, they will be able to negotiate resources for people-centered goals from state and industry entities. 

### Conclusion
At every layer of Internet infrastructure there are objects, relations, negotiation, and the possibility for struggle. Internet governance as a field is heavily focused on building expertise to guide Internet policy within the halls of power, like those in the FIA example. But the provocation here is to call attention to the many actors who already shape the Internet that already are enacting different types of bottom-up change of sociotechnical systems. Perhaps the most useful suggestion would be for Internet governance factions to invest their technocratic efforts into providing more money and support for bottom-up, cooperative, localized Internet infrastructure to be built and governed by the people who use it. It’s a tall ask, but the resulting struggles might well be more people-centered.  

### Citation Statement
In this paper, citations are distributed as follows: female names (100%), male only cites (0), female-male names (20%), and alternative institutional sources (40%).  

### References

Dean, J. (2012). *The Communist Horizon* (1st edition). Verso.  
Luxemburg, R. (2006). *Reform or Revolution and Other Writings* (1st edition). Dover Publications.  
Luxemburg, R. (2015). *The Accumulation of Capital* (A. Schwarzschild, Trans.). Martino Fine Books.  
McAlevey, J. F. (2016). *No Shortcuts: Organizing for Power in the New Gilded Age*. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190624712.001.0001  
Paris, B. (2023). Mining in Silicon Holler. In C. Cath (Ed.), *Eaten by the Internet*. Meatspace Press.  
Piven, F. F., & Cloward, R. (1978). *Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail* (unknown edition). Vintage.  
Sandoval, M. (2016). What would Rosa do?: Co-operatives and radical politics. *Soundings: A Journal of Politics and Culture*, *63*(1), 98–111.

[^1]:  Assistant Professor, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey U.S.A. britt.paris@rutgers.edu 

